+++
title = "3.5 Years, 500k Lines of Go (Part 2)"
date = 2017-10-30T19:01:00Z
type = "post"
draft = true
series = ["3.5 Years of Go"]
+++

This is a second installment of my takeaways working on
[Juju](https://github.com/juju/juju) at Canonical.  See [Part
1](/2017/03/3.5yrs-500k-lines-of-go/) for the full intro.

At the end of the last post, I promised to talk about APIs, versioning, the
database, refactoring, logging, idioms, and code reviews.  So let's get started.

## APIs

### API Technology

Juju uses JSON RPC over websockets for communication, both server to server and
client to server.  This was a very good choice for us, in my opinion.  

REST may be popular with web developers, but I find its resource-oriented
approach to be entirely too limiting for basically any application more than a
simple storage server.  You start having to bend over backwards to make actions
look like CRUD. The classic case in REST is transferring money from one bank
account to another. The answer in REST is to make this into a Create of a
"Transfer" value that has a debit account and a credit account values.  Which is
kind of horrible.

Writing code is 99% calling functions.  And RPC is just calling functions *over
there*. This is really what everyone wants to do, so how about we just let
people do it.  Then you don't have yet another logical conversion between
programming conventions.

### API Versioning

When I joined Juju I learned that they intended the Juju API to be **both**
backward compatible and forward compatible.  At first, this seemed like a big
mistake.  Surely such restrictions would strangle innovation and make change
impossible.  Turns out this was not such a terrible idea (but it did add
complexity).

As a product requirement, it makes sense for Juju.  Users of Juju may have
multiple deployments of Juju running different versions serverside.  Maybe you
have some really stable infrastructure on an older version that runs just fine.
You don't want to touch it because there's really not reason.  And maybe you
have some new environments that you really want to be able to leverage the
newest and best features of Juju.  No one wants to have to keep a different CLI
binary around for each remote environment, *and* remember what client goes with
what server.  So what you want is for any client to (more or less) work with any
server.

Because we're running JSON RPC, it's fairly easy to keep backwards and forwards
compatibility.  Older versions of APIs will drop unknown fields in structs on
the floor when they unmarshal API values.  Thus, if you design new features
around new fields in a struct, then you can gracefully degrade functionality
when talking to an older server.  And conversely, marshalling JSON that is
missing fields into a struct will simply initialize the field as the zero value,
which allows older clients to talk to newer servers... so long as the servers
know to expect zero values in the "new" fields.

Clearly, this takes some thought and discipline, but it's a pretty nice starting
point for compatibility. In addition, when such compatibility is not possible,
Juju made a new version of the API endpoint, leaving the old version for older
clients.  Thus, API endpoints had a version number (a simple integer), and
clients specify the highest version number they supported. 

## Integration tests

For Juju, we used Python to run integrations tests.  This was a huge job,
because Juju interacts with so many outside services - a half a dozen clouds and
a large portion of their APIs - and then tries to unify their APIs into
something that a service can consume without worrying about what cloud it's on.

Juju was started in python, and so were the integration tests.  When juju moved
to Go, the integration tests did not, since there was no requirement and the qa
engineers didn't know (or want to learn) go.  This was a mixed blessing.  It
ensured that our integration tests didn't rely on our product code, and thus
couldn't "cheat" by referencing implementation code.  However, it also meant
that there was a significant barrier of entry for product dev to write their own
integration tests.  Setting up a whole python environment and the context
switches that it requires made it more of a problem than it would have been if
the tests were in Go.

Note, I don't think the quality of the tests or their coverage would have been
any different, but it would have been at least slightly less difficult to get
product devs to write their own integration tests.

## The Database

Juju runs on top of MongoDB, using the excellent driver, mgo, written by
Canonical's own Gustavo Niemeyer.  The quality of the driver was generally very
good, but the reality of storing data in mongo made life difficult for
developers.  Mostly, this is because we were using Mongo incorrectly.  Mongo has
no transactions, has no foreign keys, no schema... and we used it like a
relational database.  mgo supports client-side transactions, sorta, through a
multi-step commit process.  The problem is that you have to sync up in-memory
checks with database asserts, and they can fail in subtle ways.

I and many other Juju devs agreed (as of when I was last there) that we wished
we could switch to postgres, but at that point, mongo was so deeply rooted in
the code that it would be a six month process to extract it.  A lot of that is
due to the way mongo "transactions" work.  You have to batch up a large number
of changes and assertions manually, and then apply them all at once.. so you end
up having mongo library types throughout your model code.  There are probably
ways to get tricky and hide this `